---
title: nsqd
layout: post
category: components
permalink: /components/nsqd.html
---

`nsqd` is the daemon that receives, queues, and delivers messages to clients.

It can be run standalone but is normally configured in a cluster with `nsqlookupd`
instance(s) (in which case it will announce topics and channels for discovery).

It listens on two TCP ports, one for clients and another for the HTTP API.  It
can optionally listen on a third port for HTTPS.

### Command Line Options

    -auth-http-address value
        <addr>:<port> to query auth server (may be given multiple times)
    -broadcast-address string
        address that will be registered with lookupd (defaults to the OS hostname) (default "yourhost.local")
    -broadcast-http-port int
        HTTP port that will be registered with lookupd (defaults to the HTTP port that this nsqd is listening to)
    -broadcast-tcp-port int
        TCP port that will be registered with lookupd (defaults to the TCP port that this nsqd is listening to)
    -config string
        path to config file
    -data-path string
        path to store disk-backed messages
    -deflate
        enable deflate feature negotiation (client compression) (default true)
    -e2e-processing-latency-percentile value
        message processing time percentiles (as float (0, 1.0]) to track (can be specified multiple times or comma separated '1.0,0.99,0.95', default none)
    -e2e-processing-latency-window-time duration
        calculate end to end latency quantiles for this duration of time (ie: 60s would only show quantile calculations from the past 60 seconds) (default 10m0s)
    -http-address string
        <addr>:<port> to listen on for HTTP clients (default "0.0.0.0:4151")
    -http-client-connect-timeout duration
        timeout for HTTP connect (default 2s)
    -http-client-request-timeout duration
        timeout for HTTP request (default 5s)
    -https-address string
        <addr>:<port> to listen on for HTTPS clients (default "0.0.0.0:4152")
    -log-level value
        set log verbosity: debug, info, warn, error, or fatal (default INFO)
    -log-prefix string
        log message prefix (default "[nsqd] ")
    -lookupd-tcp-address value
        lookupd TCP address (may be given multiple times)
    -max-body-size int
        maximum size of a single command body (default 5242880)
    -max-bytes-per-file int
        number of bytes per diskqueue file before rolling (default 104857600)
    -max-channel-consumers int
        maximum channel consumer connection count per nsqd instance (default 0, i.e., unlimited)
    -max-deflate-level int
        max deflate compression level a client can negotiate (> values == > nsqd CPU usage) (default 6)
    -max-heartbeat-interval duration
        maximum client configurable duration of time between client heartbeats (default 1m0s)
    -max-msg-size int
        maximum size of a single message in bytes (default 1048576)
    -max-msg-timeout duration
        maximum duration before a message will timeout (default 15m0s)
    -max-output-buffer-size int
        maximum client configurable size (in bytes) for a client output buffer (default 65536)
    -max-output-buffer-timeout duration
        maximum client configurable duration of time between flushing to a client (default 30s)
    -max-rdy-count int
        maximum RDY count for a client (default 2500)
    -max-req-timeout duration
        maximum requeuing timeout for a message (default 1h0m0s)
    -mem-queue-size int
        number of messages to keep in memory (per topic/channel) (default 10000)
    -min-output-buffer-timeout duration
        minimum client configurable duration of time between flushing to a client (default 25ms)
    -msg-timeout duration
        default duration to wait before auto-requeing a message (default 1m0s)
    -node-id int
        unique part for message IDs, (int) in range [0,1024) (default is hash of hostname) (default 248)
    -output-buffer-timeout duration
        default duration of time between flushing data to clients (default 250ms)
    -snappy
        enable snappy feature negotiation (client compression) (default true)
    -statsd-address string
        UDP <addr>:<port> of a statsd daemon for pushing stats
    -statsd-interval duration
        duration between pushing to statsd (default 1m0s)
    -statsd-mem-stats
        toggle sending memory and GC stats to statsd (default true)
    -statsd-prefix string
        prefix used for keys sent to statsd (%s for host replacement) (default "nsq.%s")
    -statsd-udp-packet-size int
        the size in bytes of statsd UDP packets (default 508)
    -sync-every int
        number of messages per diskqueue fsync (default 2500)
    -sync-timeout duration
        duration of time per diskqueue fsync (default 2s)
    -tcp-address string
        <addr>:<port> to listen on for TCP clients (default "0.0.0.0:4150")
    -tls-cert string
        path to certificate file
    -tls-client-auth-policy string
        client certificate auth policy ('require' or 'require-verify')
    -tls-key string
        path to key file
    -tls-min-version value
        minimum SSL/TLS version acceptable ('ssl3.0', 'tls1.0', 'tls1.1', or 'tls1.2') (default 769)
    -tls-required
        require TLS for client connections (true, false, tcp-https)
    -tls-root-ca-file string
        path to certificate authority file
    -verbose
        [deprecated] has no effect, use --log-level
    -version
        print version string
    -worker-id
        [deprecated] use --node-id

### HTTP API

 * [`/ping`](#get-ping) - liveness
 * [`/info`](#get-info) - version
 * [`/stats`](#get-stats) - comprehensive runtime telemetry
 * [`/pub`](#post-pub) - publish a message to a topic
 * [`/mpub`](#post-mpub) - publish multiple messages to a topic
 * [`/config`](#get-confignsqlookupdtcpaddresses) - configure nsqd
 * [`/debug/pprof`](#get-debugpprof) - pprof debugging portal
 * [`/debug/pprof/profile`](#get-debugpprofprofile) - generate pprof CPU profile
 * [`/debug/pprof/goroutine`](#get-debugpprofgoroutine) - generate pprof goroutine profile
 * [`/debug/pprof/heap`](#get-debugpprofheap) - generate pprof heap profile
 * [`/debug/pprof/block`](#get-debugpprofblock) - generate pprof blocking profile
 * [`/debug/pprof/threadcreate`](#get-debugpprofthreadcreate) - generate pprof OS thread profile

`v1` namespace (as of `nsqd` `v0.2.29+`):

 * [`/topic/create`](#post-topiccreate) - create a new topic
 * [`/topic/delete`](#post-topicdelete) - delete a topic
 * [`/topic/empty`](#post-topicempty) - empty a topic
 * [`/topic/pause`](#post-topicpause) - pause message flow for a topic
 * [`/topic/unpause`](#post-topicunpause) - unpause message flow for a topic
 * [`/channel/create`](#post-channelcreate) - create a new channel
 * [`/channel/delete`](#post-channeldelete) - delete a channel
 * [`/channel/empty`](#post-channelempty) - empty a channel
 * [`/channel/pause`](#post-channelpause) - pause message flow for a channel
 * [`/channel/unpause`](#post-channelunpause) - unpause message flow for a channel

* #### `POST` `/pub`

  Publish a message

  Query Params:

      topic - the topic to publish to
      defer - the time in ms to delay message delivery (optional)

  Body:

      raw message bytes

  Example:

      $ curl -d "<message>" http://127.0.0.1:4151/pub?topic=name

* #### `POST` `/mpub`

  Publish multiple messages in one roundtrip

  Query Params:

      topic - the topic to publish to
      binary - bool ('true' or 'false') to enable binary mode

  Body

      \n separated raw message bytes

  **NOTE**: by default `/mpub` expects messages to be delimited by `\n`, use the `?binary=true` query
  parameter to enable binary mode where the POST body is expected to be in the following format (the
  HTTP `Content-Length` header should be sent as the total size of the `POST` body):

      [ 4-byte num messages ]
      [ 4-byte message #1 size ][ N-byte binary data ]
            ... (repeated <num_messages> times)

  Example:

      $ curl -d "<message>\n<message>\n<message>" http://127.0.0.1:4151/mpub?topic=name

* #### `POST` `/topic/create`

  Create a topic

  Query Params:

      topic - the topic to create

  Example:

      $ curl -X POST http://127.0.0.1:4151/topic/create?topic=name

* #### `POST` `/topic/delete`

  Delete an existing topic (and all channels)

  Query Params:

      topic - the existing topic to delete

  Example:

      $ curl -X POST http://127.0.0.1:4151/topic/delete?topic=name

* #### `POST` `/channel/create`

  Create a channel for an existing topic

  Query Params:

      topic - the existing topic
      channel - the channel to create

  Example:

      $ curl -X POST http://127.0.0.1:4151/channel/create?topic=name&channel=name

* #### `POST` `/channel/delete`

  Delete an existing channel on an existing topic

  Query Params:

      topic - the existing topic
      channel - the existing channel to delete

  Example:

      $ curl -X POST http://127.0.0.1:4151/channel/delete?topic=name&channel=name

* #### `POST` `/topic/empty`

  Empty all the queued messages (in-memory and disk) for an existing topic

  Query Params:

      topic - the existing topic to empty

  Example:

      $ curl -X POST http://127.0.0.1:4151/topic/empty?topic=name

* #### `POST` `/channel/empty`

  Empty all the queued messages (in-memory and disk) for an existing channel

  Query Params:

      topic - the existing topic
      channel - the existing channel to empty

  Example:

      $ curl -X POST http://127.0.0.1:4151/channel/empty?topic=name&channel=name

* #### `POST` `/topic/pause`

  Pause message flow to all channels on an existing topic (messages will queue at *topic*)

  Query Params:

      topic - the existing topic

  Example:

      $ curl -X POST http://127.0.0.1:4151/topic/pause?topic=name

* #### `POST` `/topic/unpause`

  Resume message flow to channels of an existing, paused, topic

  Query Params:

      topic - the existing topic

  Example:

      $ curl -X POST http://127.0.0.1:4151/topic/unpause?topic=name

* #### `POST` `/channel/pause`

  Pause message flow to consumers of an existing channel (messages will queue at *channel*)

  Query Params:

      topic - the existing topic
      channel - the existing channel to pause

  Example:

      $ curl -X POST http://127.0.0.1:4151/channel/pause?topic=name&channel=name

* #### `POST` `/channel/unpause`

  Resume message flow to consumers of an existing, paused, channel

  Query Params:

      topic - the existing topic
      channel - the existing channel to pause

  Example:

      $ curl -X POST http://127.0.0.1:4151/channel/unpause?topic=name&channel=name

* #### `GET` `/stats`

  Return internal statistics

  Query Params

      format - (optional) `text` or `json` (default = `text`)
      topic - (optional) filter to topic
      channel - (optional) filter to channel

  Example:

      $ curl http://127.0.0.1:4151/stats

* #### `GET` `/ping`

  Monitoring endpoint, should return `200` `OK`. It returns an HTTP `500` if it is not healthy.

  **NOTE**: The only "unhealthy" state is if `nsqd` failed to write messages to disk when
  overflow occurred.

* #### `GET` `/info`

  Version information

* #### `GET` `/debug/pprof`

  An index page of available debugging endpoints

* #### `GET` `/debug/pprof/profile`

  Starts a `pprof` CPU profile for 30s and returns the output via the request

  **NOTE**: this endpoint is *not* listed in the `/debug/pprof` index page because of its effect
  on runtime performance.

* #### `GET` `/debug/pprof/goroutine`

  Returns a stack trace for all running goroutines

* #### `GET` `/debug/pprof/heap`

  Returns a heap and memstats profile (top portion can be used as a `pprof` memory profile)

* #### `GET` `/debug/pprof/block`

  Returns a goroutine blocking profile

* #### `GET` `/debug/pprof/threadcreate`

  Returns goroutine stack traces that led to the creation of an OS thread

* #### `GET` `/config/nsqlookupd_tcp_addresses`

  List of nsqlookupd TCP addresses.

  Example:

      $ curl http://127.0.0.1:4151/config/nsqlookupd_tcp_addresses

* #### `PUT` `/config/nsqlookupd_tcp_addresses`

  Update the nsqlookupd TCP addresses.

  Body:

      JSON array of TCP addresses.

  Example:

      $ curl -X PUT http://127.0.0.1:4151/config/nsqlookupd_tcp_addresses \
          -d '["127.0.0.1:4160", "127.0.0.2:4160"]'

### <a name="pprof">Debugging and Profiling</a>

`nsqd` provides a suite of profiling endpoints that integrate directly with Go's [pprof][go_pprof]
tool.  If you have the go tool suite installed, simply run:

{% highlight bash %}
# memory profiling
$ go tool pprof http://localhost:4151/debug/pprof/heap

# cpu profiling
$ go tool pprof http://localhost:4151/debug/pprof/profile
{% endhighlight %}

### TLS

When `nsqd` is configured with `--tls-cert` and `--tls-key` clients can negotiate upgrading their
connection to TLS for enhanced security.

Additionally, you can *require* that clients negotiate TLS with `--tls-required` (as of `nsqd`
`v0.2.28+`).

You can configure an `nsqd` client certificate policy via `--tls-client-auth-policy` (`require` or
`require-verify`):

 * `require` - the client must offer a certificate, otherwise rejected
 * `require-verify` - the client must offer a valid certificate according to the default CA
                      or the chain specified by `--tls-root-ca-file`, otherwise rejected

This can be used as a form of client authentication (as of `nsqd` `v0.2.28+`).

If you want to generate a password-less self-signed certificate using openssl:

{% highlight bash %}
$ openssl req -x509 -newkey rsa:2048 -keyout key.pem -out cert.pem -days 365 -nodes
{% endhighlight %}

### <a name="auth">AUTH</a>

NOTE: available in `nsqd` `v0.2.29+`

To configure `nsqd` to require authorization you need to specify the `-auth-http-address=host:port`
flag with an Auth Server that conforms to the Auth HTTP protocol.

NOTE: It is expected when using authorization that only the `nsqd` TCP protocol is exposed to
external clients, not the HTTP(S) endpoints. See the note below about exposing stats and lookup to
clients with auth.

The Auth Server must accept an HTTP request on:

    /auth?remote_ip=...&tls=...&auth_secret=...

And return a response in the following format:

    {
      "ttl": 3600,
      "identity": "username",
      "identity_url": "https://....",
      "authorizations": [
        {
          "permissions": [
            "subscribe",
            "publish"
          ],
          "topic": ".*",
          "channels": [
            ".*"
          ]
        }
      ]
    }

Note that topic and channel strings *must* be regexes for `nsqd` to apply permissions. `nsqd` will
cache the response for up to the TTL duration and will re-request authorization on that interval.

It is expected that in most cases authorization will be used with TLS to secure sensitive
information secrets passed from clients to `nsqd`. Communication between `nsqd` and the Auth Server
is expected to be over a trusted network (and is *not* encrypted). If an Auth Server is making auth
choices solely based on remote IP information, clients can use a placeholder string (like `.`) as
the `AUTH` command body (which the Auth Server ignores).

An example Auth Server is [pynsqauthd](https://github.com/jehiah/nsqauth-contrib#pynsqauthd).

A helper server to expose `nsqlookupd` and `nsqd` `/stats` data to clients, filtered by permissions
from the Auth Server, can be found in
[nsqauthfilter](https://github.com/jehiah/nsqauth-contrib#nsqauthfilter)

When using the command line utilities, authorization can be used via the `--reader-opt` flag.

{% highlight bash %}
$ nsq_tail ... -reader-opt="tls_v1,true" -reader-opt="auth_secret,$SECRET"
{% endhighlight %}

### <a name="e2e">End-to-End Processing Latency</a>

You can optionally configure `nsqd` to collect and emit end-to-end message processing
latency for configurable percentiles using the `--e2e-processing-latency-percentile` flag.

The values are calculated using a probabilistic percentile technique described in *[Effective
Computation of Biased Quantiles over Data Streams][bquant]*. We use the [perks][perks] package by
[bmizerany][bmizerany] which implements this algorithm.

In order to bias the view toward more recent processing behavior we only keep quantile information
for the past `N` minutes (configurable via `--e2e-processing-latency-window-time`). Internally we
maintain two quantiles, per channel, that each store `N/2` minutes worth of latency data. Every
`N/2` minutes we reset one quantile (and start inserting new data into it). Since quantiles can be
merged, this results in a coarse rolling window.

Since we only collect data at the *channel* level, for a *topic* we aggregate and merge all
*channel* quantiles. This technique can only be used if the data is on the same `nsqd` instance.
However when data is being accumulated across `nsqd` (for instance via `nsqlookupd`), we take the
average of the quantile values for each `nsqd`. In order to maintain some statistical accuracy
regarding the distribution of latencies across `nsqd`, we also provide the min/max values in
addition to the average.

NOTE: if there are no consumers connected the values cannot update despite there (obviously) being
a slowly increasing end-to-end processing time for the queued messages. This is because end-to-end
metrics are only calculated when `nsqd` receives a `FIN` for a given message from a client. When a
consumer reconnects the values will adjust appropriately.

### <a name="statsd">Statsd / Graphite Integration</a>

When using `--statsd-address` to specify the UDP `<addr>:<port>` for
[statsd](https://github.com/etsy/statsd) (or a port of statsd like
[statsdaemon](https://github.com/bitly/statsdaemon)), `nsqd` will push metrics to statsd
periodically based on the interval specified in `--statsd-interval` (IMPORTANT: this interval should
**always** be less than or equal to the interval at which statsd flushes to graphite). With this
enabled `nsqadmin` can be configured to display charts directly from graphite.

We recommend the following configuration for graphite (but these choices should be evaluated based
on your available resources and requirements). Again, the important piece to remember is that statsd
should flush at an interval less than or equal to the smallest time bucket in `storage-schemas.conf`
and `nsqd` should be configured to flush at or below that same interval via `--statsd-interval`.

{% highlight ini %}
# storage-schemas.conf
[nsq]
pattern = ^nsq\..*
retentions = 1m:1d,5m:30d,15m:1y

# storage-aggregation.conf
[default_nsq]
pattern = ^nsq\..*
xFilesFactor = 0.2
aggregationMethod = average
{% endhighlight %}

The `nsqd` instance will push to the following `statsd` paths:

    nsq.<nsqd_host>_<nsqd_port>.topic.<topic_name>.backend_depth [gauge]
    nsq.<nsqd_host>_<nsqd_port>.topic.<topic_name>.depth [gauge]
    nsq.<nsqd_host>_<nsqd_port>.topic.<topic_name>.message_count
    nsq.<nsqd_host>_<nsqd_port>.topic.<topic_name>.message_bytes
    nsq.<nsqd_host>_<nsqd_port>.topic.<topic_name>.channel.<channel_name>.backend_depth [gauge]
    nsq.<nsqd_host>_<nsqd_port>.topic.<topic_name>.channel.<channel_name>.clients [gauge]
    nsq.<nsqd_host>_<nsqd_port>.topic.<topic_name>.channel.<channel_name>.deferred_count [gauge]
    nsq.<nsqd_host>_<nsqd_port>.topic.<topic_name>.channel.<channel_name>.depth [gauge]
    nsq.<nsqd_host>_<nsqd_port>.topic.<topic_name>.channel.<channel_name>.in_flight_count [gauge]
    nsq.<nsqd_host>_<nsqd_port>.topic.<topic_name>.channel.<channel_name>.message_count
    nsq.<nsqd_host>_<nsqd_port>.topic.<topic_name>.channel.<channel_name>.requeue_count
    nsq.<nsqd_host>_<nsqd_port>.topic.<topic_name>.channel.<channel_name>.timeout_count

    # if --statsd-mem-stats is enabled
    nsq.<nsqd_host>_<nsqd_port>.mem.heap_objects [gauge]
    nsq.<nsqd_host>_<nsqd_port>.mem.heap_idle_bytes [gauge]
    nsq.<nsqd_host>_<nsqd_port>.mem.heap_in_use_bytes [gauge]
    nsq.<nsqd_host>_<nsqd_port>.mem.heap_released_bytes [gauge]
    nsq.<nsqd_host>_<nsqd_port>.mem.gc_pause_usec_100 [gauge]
    nsq.<nsqd_host>_<nsqd_port>.mem.gc_pause_usec_99 [gauge]
    nsq.<nsqd_host>_<nsqd_port>.mem.gc_pause_usec_95 [gauge]
    nsq.<nsqd_host>_<nsqd_port>.mem.mem.next_gc_bytes [gauge]
    nsq.<nsqd_host>_<nsqd_port>.mem.gc_runs

    # if --e2e-processing-latency-percentile is specified, for each percentile
    nsq.<nsqd_host>_<nsqd_port>.topic.<topic_name>.e2e_processing_latency_<percent> [gauge]
    nsq.<nsqd_host>_<nsqd_port>.topic.<topic_name>.channel.<channel_name>.e2e_processing_latency_<percent> [gauge]

[go_pprof]: https://golang.org/pkg/net/http/pprof/#pkg-overview
[bquant]: https://www.cs.rutgers.edu/~muthu/bquant.pdf
[bmizerany]: https://github.com/bmizerany
[perks]: https://github.com/bmizerany/perks
